[[dynamic-language]]
= Dynamic Language Support



[[dynamic-language-introduction]]
== Introduction

Spring 2.0 introduces comprehensive support for using classes and objects that have been
defined using a dynamic language (such as JRuby) with Spring. This support allows you to
write any number of classes in a supported dynamic language, and have the Spring
container transparently instantiate, configure and dependency inject the resulting
objects.

The dynamic languages currently supported are:

* JRuby 1.5+
* Groovy 1.8+
* BeanShell 2.0

.Why only these languages?
****
The supported languages were chosen because __a)__ the languages have a lot of traction in
the Java enterprise community, __b)__ no requests were made for other languages at the time
that this support was added, and __c)__ the Spring developers were most familiar with
them.
****

Fully working examples of where this dynamic language support can be immediately useful
are described in <<dynamic-language-scenarios>>.



[[dynamic-language-a-first-example]]
== AppConfig first example

This bulk of this chapter is concerned with describing the dynamic language support in
detail. Before diving into all of the ins and outs of the dynamic language support,
let's look at a quick example of a bean defined in a dynamic language. The dynamic
language for this first bean is Groovy (the basis of this example was taken from the
Spring test suite, so if you want to see equivalent examples in any of the other
supported languages, take a look at the source code).

Find below the `Messenger` interface that the Groovy bean is going to be implementing,
and note that this interface is defined in plain Java. Dependent objects that are
injected with a reference to the `Messenger` won't know that the underlying
implementation is a Groovy script.

[source,java,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	package org.springframework.scripting;

	public interface Messenger {

		String getMessage();

	}
----

Here is the definition of a class that has a dependency on the `Messenger` interface.

[source,java,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	package org.springframework.scripting;

	public class DefaultBookingService implements BookingService {

		private Messenger messenger;

		public void setMessenger(Messenger messenger) {
			this.messenger = messenger;
		}

		public void processBooking() {
			// use the injected Messenger object...
		}

	}
----

Here is an implementation of the `Messenger` interface in Groovy.

[source,java,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	// from the file 'Messenger.groovy'
	package org.springframework.scripting.groovy;

	// import the Messenger interface (written in Java) that is to be implemented
	import org.springframework.scripting.Messenger

	// define the implementation in Groovy
	class GroovyMessenger implements Messenger {

		String message

	}
----

Finally, here are the bean definitions that will effect the injection of the
Groovy-defined `Messenger` implementation into an instance of the
`DefaultBookingService` class.

[NOTE]
====
To use the custom dynamic language tags to define dynamic-language-backed beans, you
need to have the XML Schema preamble at the top of your Spring XML configuration file.
You also need to be using a Spring `ApplicationContext` implementation as your IoC
container. Using the dynamic-language-backed beans with a plain `BeanFactory`
implementation is supported, but you have to manage the plumbing of the Spring internals
to do so.

For more information on schema-based configuration, see <<appendix.adoc#xsd-configuration,
XML Schema-based configuration>>.
====

[source,xml,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
	<beans xmlns="http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
		xmlns:lang="http://www.springframework.org/schema/lang"
		xsi:schemaLocation="
			http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans/spring-beans.xsd
			http://www.springframework.org/schema/lang http://www.springframework.org/schema/lang/spring-lang.xsd">

		<!-- this is the bean definition for the Groovy-backed Messenger implementation -->
		<lang:groovy id="messenger" script-source="classpath:Messenger.groovy">
			<lang:property name="message" value="I Can Do The Frug" />
		</lang:groovy>

		<!-- an otherwise normal bean that will be injected by the Groovy-backed Messenger -->
		<bean id="bookingService" class="x.y.DefaultBookingService">
			<property name="messenger" ref="messenger" />
		</bean>

	</beans>
----

The `bookingService` bean (a `DefaultBookingService`) can now use its private
`messenger` member variable as normal because the `Messenger` instance that was injected
into it __is__ a `Messenger` instance. There is nothing special going on here, just
plain Java and plain Groovy.

Hopefully the above XML snippet is self-explanatory, but don't worry unduly if it isn't.
Keep reading for the in-depth detail on the whys and wherefores of the above
configuration.



[[dynamic-language-beans]]
== Defining beans that are backed by dynamic languages

This section describes exactly how you define Spring managed beans in any of the
supported dynamic languages.

Please note that this chapter does not attempt to explain the syntax and idioms of the
supported dynamic languages. For example, if you want to use Groovy to write certain of
the classes in your application, then the assumption is that you already know Groovy. If
you need further details about the dynamic languages themselves, please
consult <<dynamic-language-resources>> at the end of this chapter.


[[dynamic-language-beans-concepts]]
=== Common concepts

The steps involved in using dynamic-language-backed beans are as follows:

* Write the test for the dynamic language source code (naturally)
* __Then__ write the dynamic language source code itself :)
* Define your dynamic-language-backed beans using the appropriate `<lang:language/>`
  element in the XML configuration (you can of course define such beans programmatically
  using the Spring API - although you will have to consult the source code for
  directions on how to do this as this type of advanced configuration is not covered in
  this chapter). Note this is an iterative step. You will need at least one bean
  definition per dynamic language source file (although the same dynamic language source
  file can of course be referenced by multiple bean definitions).

The first two steps (testing and writing your dynamic language source files) are beyond
the scope of this chapter. Refer to the language specification and / or reference manual
for your chosen dynamic language and crack on with developing your dynamic language
source files. You __will__ first want to read the rest of this chapter though, as
Spring's dynamic language support does make some (small) assumptions about the contents
of your dynamic language source files.

[[dynamic-language-beans-concepts-xml-language-element]]
==== The <lang:language/> element

The final step involves defining dynamic-language-backed bean definitions, one for each
bean that you want to configure (this is no different from normal JavaBean
configuration). However, instead of specifying the fully qualified classname of the
class that is to be instantiated and configured by the container, you use the
`<lang:language/>` element to define the dynamic language-backed bean.

Each of the supported languages has a corresponding `<lang:language/>` element:

* `<lang:groovy/>` (Groovy)
* `<lang:bsh/>` (BeanShell)
* `<lang:std/>` (JSR-223)

The exact attributes and child elements that are available for configuration depends on
exactly which language the bean has been defined in (the language-specific sections
below provide the full lowdown on this).

[[dynamic-language-refreshable-beans]]
==== Refreshable beans

One of the (if not __the__) most compelling value adds of the dynamic language support
in Spring is the__'refreshable bean'__ feature.

AppConfig refreshable bean is a dynamic-language-backed bean that with a small amount of
configuration, a dynamic-language-backed bean can monitor changes in its underlying
source file resource, and then reload itself when the dynamic language source file is
changed (for example when a developer edits and saves changes to the file on the
filesystem).

This allows a developer to deploy any number of dynamic language source files as part of
an application, configure the Spring container to create beans backed by dynamic
language source files (using the mechanisms described in this chapter), and then later,
as requirements change or some other external factor comes into play, simply edit a
dynamic language source file and have any change they make reflected in the bean that is
backed by the changed dynamic language source file. There is no need to shut down a
running application (or redeploy in the case of a web application). The
dynamic-language-backed bean so amended will pick up the new state and logic from the
changed dynamic language source file.

[NOTE]
====
Please note that this feature is __off__ by default.
====

Let's take a look at an example to see just how easy it is to start using refreshable
beans. To __turn on__ the refreshable beans feature, you simply have to specify exactly
__one__ additional attribute on the `<lang:language/>` element of your bean definition.
So if we stick with <<dynamic-language-a-first-example,the example>> from earlier in this
chapter, here's what we would change in the Spring XML configuration to effect
refreshable beans:

[source,xml,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	<beans>

		<!-- this bean is now 'refreshable' due to the presence of the 'refresh-check-delay' attribute -->
		<lang:groovy id="messenger"
				refresh-check-delay="5000" <!-- switches refreshing on with 5 seconds between checks -->
				script-source="classpath:Messenger.groovy">
			<lang:property name="message" value="I Can Do The Frug" />
		</lang:groovy>

		<bean id="bookingService" class="x.y.DefaultBookingService">
			<property name="messenger" ref="messenger" />
		</bean>

	</beans>
----

That really is all you have to do. The `'refresh-check-delay'` attribute defined on the
`'messenger'` bean definition is the number of milliseconds after which the bean will be
refreshed with any changes made to the underlying dynamic language source file. You can
turn off the refresh behavior by assigning a negative value to the
`'refresh-check-delay'` attribute. Remember that, by default, the refresh behavior is
disabled. If you don't want the refresh behavior, then simply don't define the attribute.

If we then run the following application we can exercise the refreshable feature; please
do excuse the __'jumping-through-hoops-to-pause-the-execution'__ shenanigans in this
next slice of code. The `System.in.read()` call is only there so that the execution of
the program pauses while I (the author) go off and edit the underlying dynamic language
source file so that the refresh will trigger on the dynamic-language-backed bean when
the program resumes execution.

[source,java,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	import org.springframework.context.ApplicationContext;
	import org.springframework.context.support.ClassPathXmlApplicationContext;
	import org.springframework.scripting.Messenger;

	public final class Boot {

		public static void main(final String[] args) throws Exception {
			ApplicationContext ctx = new ClassPathXmlApplicationContext("beans.xml");
			Messenger messenger = (Messenger) ctx.getBean("messenger");
			System.out.println(messenger.getMessage());
			// pause execution while I go off and make changes to the source file...
			System.in.read();
			System.out.println(messenger.getMessage());
		}
	}
----

Let's assume then, for the purposes of this example, that all calls to the
`getMessage()` method of `Messenger` implementations have to be changed such that the
message is surrounded by quotes. Below are the changes that I (the author) make to the
`Messenger.groovy` source file when the execution of the program is paused.

[source,java,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	package org.springframework.scripting

	class GroovyMessenger implements Messenger {

		private String message = "Bingo"

		public String getMessage() {
			// change the implementation to surround the message in quotes
			return "'" + this.message + "'"
		}

		public void setMessage(String message) {
			this.message = message
		}
	}
----

When the program executes, the output before the input pause will be __I Can Do The
Frug__. After the change to the source file is made and saved, and the program resumes
execution, the result of calling the `getMessage()` method on the
dynamic-language-backed `Messenger` implementation will be __'I Can Do The Frug'__
(notice the inclusion of the additional quotes).

It is important to understand that changes to a script will __not__ trigger a refresh if
the changes occur within the window of the `'refresh-check-delay'` value. It is equally
important to understand that changes to the script are __not__ actually 'picked up' until
a method is called on the dynamic-language-backed bean. It is only when a method is
called on a dynamic-language-backed bean that it checks to see if its underlying script
source has changed. Any exceptions relating to refreshing the script (such as
encountering a compilation error, or finding that the script file has been deleted) will
result in a __fatal__ exception being propagated to the calling code.

The refreshable bean behavior described above does __not__ apply to dynamic language
source files defined using the `<lang:inline-script/>` element notation (see
<<dynamic-language-beans-inline>>). Additionally, it __only__ applies to beans where
changes to the underlying source file can actually be detected; for example, by code
that checks the last modified date of a dynamic language source file that exists on the
filesystem.

[[dynamic-language-beans-inline]]
==== Inline dynamic language source files

The dynamic language support can also cater for dynamic language source files that are
embedded directly in Spring bean definitions. More specifically, the
`<lang:inline-script/>` element allows you to define dynamic language source immediately
inside a Spring configuration file. An example will perhaps make the inline script
feature crystal clear:

[source,xml,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	<lang:groovy id="messenger">
		<lang:inline-script>

	package org.springframework.scripting.groovy;

	import org.springframework.scripting.Messenger

	class GroovyMessenger implements Messenger {
		String message
	}

		</lang:inline-script>
		<lang:property name="message" value="I Can Do The Frug" />
	</lang:groovy>
----

If we put to one side the issues surrounding whether it is good practice to define
dynamic language source inside a Spring configuration file, the `<lang:inline-script/>`
element can be useful in some scenarios. For instance, we might want to quickly add a
Spring `Validator` implementation to a Spring MVC `Controller`. This is but a moment's
work using inline source. (See <<dynamic-language-scenarios-validators>> for such an
example.)

[[dynamic-language-beans-ctor-injection]]
==== Understanding Constructor Injection in the context of dynamic-language-backed beans

There is one __very__ important thing to be aware of with regard to Spring's dynamic
language support. Namely, it is not (currently) possible to supply constructor arguments
to dynamic-language-backed beans (and hence constructor-injection is not available for
dynamic-language-backed beans). In the interests of making this special handling of
constructors and properties 100% clear, the following mixture of code and configuration
will __not__ work.

[source,java,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	// from the file 'Messenger.groovy'
	package org.springframework.scripting.groovy;

	import org.springframework.scripting.Messenger

	class GroovyMessenger implements Messenger {

		GroovyMessenger() {}

		// this constructor is not available for Constructor Injection
		GroovyMessenger(String message) {
			this.message = message;
		}

		String message

		String anotherMessage

	}
----

[source,xml,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	<lang:groovy id="badMessenger"
		script-source="classpath:Messenger.groovy">
		<!-- this next constructor argument will *not* be injected into the GroovyMessenger -->
		<!-- in fact, this isn't even allowed according to the schema -->
		<constructor-arg value="This will *not* work" />

		<!-- only property values are injected into the dynamic-language-backed object -->
		<lang:property name="anotherMessage" value="Passed straight through to the dynamic-language-backed object" />

	</lang>
----

In practice this limitation is not as significant as it first appears since setter
injection is the injection style favored by the overwhelming majority of developers
anyway (let's leave the discussion as to whether that is a good thing to another day).


[[dynamic-language-beans-groovy]]
=== Groovy beans

.The Groovy library dependencies
****

The Groovy scripting support in Spring requires the following libraries to be on the
classpath of your application.

* `groovy-1.8.jar`
* `asm-3.2.jar`
* `antlr-2.7.7.jar`
****

From the Groovy homepage...

"__Groovy is an agile dynamic language for the Java 2 Platform that has many of the
features that people like so much in languages like Python, Ruby and Smalltalk, making
them available to Java developers using a Java-like syntax. __"

If you have read this chapter straight from the top, you will already have
<<dynamic-language-a-first-example,seen an example>> of a Groovy-dynamic-language-backed
bean. Let's look at another example (again using an example from the Spring test suite).

[source,java,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	package org.springframework.scripting;

	public interface Calculator {

		int add(int x, int y);

	}
----

Here is an implementation of the `Calculator` interface in Groovy.

[source,groovy,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	// from the file 'calculator.groovy'
	package org.springframework.scripting.groovy

	class GroovyCalculator implements Calculator {

		int add(int x, int y) {
			x + y
		}

	}
----

[source,xml,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	<-- from the file 'beans.xml' -->
	<beans>
		<lang:groovy id="calculator" script-source="classpath:calculator.groovy"/>
	</beans>
----

Lastly, here is a small application to exercise the above configuration.

[source,java,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	package org.springframework.scripting;

	import org.springframework.context.ApplicationContext;
	import org.springframework.context.support.ClassPathXmlApplicationContext;

	public class Main {

		public static void Main(String[] args) {
			ApplicationContext ctx = new ClassPathXmlApplicationContext("beans.xml");
			Calculator calc = (Calculator) ctx.getBean("calculator");
			System.out.println(calc.add(2, 8));
		}
	}
----

The resulting output from running the above program will be (unsurprisingly) __10__.
(Exciting example, huh? Remember that the intent is to illustrate the concept. Please
consult the dynamic language showcase project for a more complex example, or indeed
<<dynamic-language-scenarios>> later in this chapter).

It is important that you __do not__ define more than one class per Groovy source file.
While this is perfectly legal in Groovy, it is (arguably) a bad practice: in the
interests of a consistent approach, you should (in the opinion of this author) respect
the standard Java conventions of one (public) class per source file.

[[dynamic-language-beans-groovy-customizer]]
==== Customizing Groovy objects via a callback

The `GroovyObjectCustomizer` interface is a callback that allows you to hook additional
creation logic into the process of creating a Groovy-backed bean. For example,
implementations of this interface could invoke any required initialization method(s), or
set some default property values, or specify a custom `MetaClass`.

[source,java,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	public interface GroovyObjectCustomizer {

		void customize(GroovyObject goo);
	}
----

The Spring Framework will instantiate an instance of your Groovy-backed bean, and will
then pass the created `GroovyObject` to the specified `GroovyObjectCustomizer` if one
has been defined. You can do whatever you like with the supplied `GroovyObject`
reference: it is expected that the setting of a custom `MetaClass` is what most folks
will want to do with this callback, and you can see an example of doing that below.

[source,java,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	public final class SimpleMethodTracingCustomizer implements GroovyObjectCustomizer {

		public void customize(GroovyObject goo) {
			DelegatingMetaClass metaClass = new DelegatingMetaClass(goo.getMetaClass()) {

				public Object invokeMethod(Object object, String methodName, Object[] arguments) {
					System.out.println("Invoking '" + methodName + "'.");
					return super.invokeMethod(object, methodName, arguments);
				}
			};
			metaClass.initialize();
			goo.setMetaClass(metaClass);
		}

	}
----

AppConfig full discussion of meta-programming in Groovy is beyond the scope of the Spring
reference manual. Consult the relevant section of the Groovy reference manual, or do a
search online: there are plenty of articles concerning this topic. Actually making use
of a `GroovyObjectCustomizer` is easy if you are using the Spring namespace support.

[source,xml,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	<!-- define the GroovyObjectCustomizer just like any other bean -->
	<bean id="tracingCustomizer" class="example.SimpleMethodTracingCustomizer"/>

		<!-- ... and plug it into the desired Groovy bean via the 'customizer-ref' attribute -->
		<lang:groovy id="calculator"
			script-source="classpath:org/springframework/scripting/groovy/Calculator.groovy"
			customizer-ref="tracingCustomizer"/>
----

If you are not using the Spring namespace support, you can still use the
`GroovyObjectCustomizer` functionality.

[source,xml,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	<bean id="calculator" class="org.springframework.scripting.groovy.GroovyScriptFactory">
		<constructor-arg value="classpath:org/springframework/scripting/groovy/Calculator.groovy"/>
		<!-- define the GroovyObjectCustomizer (as an inner bean) -->
		<constructor-arg>
			<bean id="tracingCustomizer" class="example.SimpleMethodTracingCustomizer"/>
		</constructor-arg>
	</bean>

	<bean class="org.springframework.scripting.support.ScriptFactoryPostProcessor"/>
----

[NOTE]
====
As of Spring Framework 4.3.3, you may also specify a Groovy `CompilationCustomizer`
(such as an `ImportCustomizer`) or even a full Groovy `CompilerConfiguration` object
in the same place as Spring's `GroovyObjectCustomizer`.
====


[[dynamic-language-beans-bsh]]
=== BeanShell beans

.The BeanShell library dependencies
****

The BeanShell scripting support in Spring requires the following libraries to be on the
classpath of your application.

* `bsh-2.0b4.jar`
****

From the BeanShell homepage...

"__BeanShell is a small, free, embeddable Java source interpreter with dynamic language
features, written in Java. BeanShell dynamically executes standard Java syntax and
extends it with common scripting conveniences such as loose types, commands, and method
closures like those in Perl and JavaScript.__"

In contrast to Groovy, BeanShell-backed bean definitions require some (small) additional
configuration. The implementation of the BeanShell dynamic language support in Spring is
interesting in that what happens is this: Spring creates a JDK dynamic proxy
implementing all of the interfaces that are specified in the `'script-interfaces'`
attribute value of the `<lang:bsh>` element (this is why you __must__ supply at least
one interface in the value of the attribute, and (accordingly) program to interfaces
when using BeanShell-backed beans). This means that every method call on a
BeanShell-backed object is going through the JDK dynamic proxy invocation mechanism.

Let's look at a fully working example of using a BeanShell-based bean that implements
the `Messenger` interface that was defined earlier in this chapter (repeated below for
your convenience).

[source,java,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	package org.springframework.scripting;

	public interface Messenger {

		String getMessage();

	}
----

Here is the BeanShell 'implementation' (the term is used loosely here) of the
`Messenger` interface.

[source,java,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	String message;

	String getMessage() {
		return message;
	}

	void setMessage(String aMessage) {
		message = aMessage;
	}
----

And here is the Spring XML that defines an 'instance' of the above 'class' (again, the
term is used very loosely here).

[source,xml,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	<lang:bsh id="messageService" script-source="classpath:BshMessenger.bsh"
		script-interfaces="org.springframework.scripting.Messenger">

		<lang:property name="message" value="Hello World!" />
	</lang:bsh>
----

See <<dynamic-language-scenarios>> for some scenarios where you might want to use
BeanShell-based beans.



[[dynamic-language-scenarios]]
== Scenarios

The possible scenarios where defining Spring managed beans in a scripting language would
be beneficial are, of course, many and varied. This section describes two possible use
cases for the dynamic language support in Spring.


[[dynamic-language-scenarios-controllers]]
=== Scripted Spring MVC Controllers

One group of classes that may benefit from using dynamic-language-backed beans is that
of Spring MVC controllers. In pure Spring MVC applications, the navigational flow
through a web application is to a large extent determined by code encapsulated within
your Spring MVC controllers. As the navigational flow and other presentation layer logic
of a web application needs to be updated to respond to support issues or changing
business requirements, it may well be easier to effect any such required changes by
editing one or more dynamic language source files and seeing those changes being
immediately reflected in the state of a running application.

Remember that in the lightweight architectural model espoused by projects such as
Spring, you are typically aiming to have a really __thin__ presentation layer, with all
the meaty business logic of an application being contained in the domain and service
layer classes. Developing Spring MVC controllers as dynamic-language-backed beans allows
you to change presentation layer logic by simply editing and saving text files; any
changes to such dynamic language source files will (depending on the configuration)
automatically be reflected in the beans that are backed by dynamic language source files.

[NOTE]
====
In order to effect this automatic 'pickup' of any changes to dynamic-language-backed
beans, you will have had to enable the 'refreshable beans' functionality. See
<<dynamic-language-refreshable-beans>> for a full treatment of this feature.
====

Find below an example of an `org.springframework.web.servlet.mvc.Controller` implemented
using the Groovy dynamic language.

[source,java,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	// from the file '/WEB-INF/groovy/FortuneController.groovy'
	package org.springframework.showcase.fortune.web

	import org.springframework.showcase.fortune.service.FortuneService
	import org.springframework.showcase.fortune.domain.Fortune
	import org.springframework.web.servlet.ModelAndView
	import org.springframework.web.servlet.mvc.Controller

	import javax.servlet.http.HttpServletRequest
	import javax.servlet.http.HttpServletResponse

	class FortuneController implements Controller {

		@Property FortuneService fortuneService

		ModelAndView handleRequest(HttpServletRequest request,
				HttpServletResponse httpServletResponse) {
			return new ModelAndView("tell", "fortune", this.fortuneService.tellFortune())
		}

	}
----

[source,xml,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	<lang:groovy id="fortune"
			refresh-check-delay="3000"
			script-source="/WEB-INF/groovy/FortuneController.groovy">
		<lang:property name="fortuneService" ref="fortuneService"/>
	</lang:groovy>
----


[[dynamic-language-scenarios-validators]]
=== Scripted Validators

Another area of application development with Spring that may benefit from the
flexibility afforded by dynamic-language-backed beans is that of validation. It __may__
be easier to express complex validation logic using a loosely typed dynamic language
(that may also have support for inline regular expressions) as opposed to regular Java.

Again, developing validators as dynamic-language-backed beans allows you to change
validation logic by simply editing and saving a simple text file; any such changes will
(depending on the configuration) automatically be reflected in the execution of a
running application and would not require the restart of an application.

[NOTE]
====
Please note that in order to effect the automatic 'pickup' of any changes to
dynamic-language-backed beans, you will have had to enable the 'refreshable beans'
feature. See <<dynamic-language-refreshable-beans>> for a full and detailed treatment of
this feature.
====

Find below an example of a Spring `org.springframework.validation.Validator` implemented
using the Groovy dynamic language. (See <<core.adoc#validator,
Validation using Spring’s Validator interface>> for a discussion of the
`Validator` interface.)

[source,groovy,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	import org.springframework.validation.Validator
	import org.springframework.validation.Errors
	import org.springframework.beans.TestBean

	class TestBeanValidator implements Validator {

		boolean supports(Class clazz) {
			return TestBean.class.isAssignableFrom(clazz)
		}

		void validate(Object bean, Errors errors) {
			if(bean.name?.trim()?.size() > 0) {
				return
			}
			errors.reject("whitespace", "Cannot be composed wholly of whitespace.")
		}

	}
----



[[dynamic-language-final-notes]]
== Bits and bobs

This last section contains some bits and bobs related to the dynamic language support.


[[dynamic-language-final-notes-aop]]
=== AOP - advising scripted beans

It is possible to use the Spring AOP framework to advise scripted beans. The Spring AOP
framework actually is unaware that a bean that is being advised might be a scripted
bean, so all of the AOP use cases and functionality that you may be using or aim to use
will work with scripted beans. There is just one (small) thing that you need to be aware
of when advising scripted beans... you cannot use class-based proxies, you must
use <<core.adoc#aop-proxying,interface-based proxies>>.

You are of course not just limited to advising scripted beans... you can also write
aspects themselves in a supported dynamic language and use such beans to advise other
Spring beans. This really would be an advanced use of the dynamic language support
though.


[[dynamic-language-final-notes-scopes]]
=== Scoping

In case it is not immediately obvious, scripted beans can of course be scoped just like
any other bean. The `scope` attribute on the various `<lang:language/>` elements allows
you to control the scope of the underlying scripted bean, just as it does with a regular
bean. (The default scope is <<core.adoc#beans-factory-scopes-singleton,singleton>>, just as it is
with 'regular' beans.)

Find below an example of using the `scope` attribute to define a Groovy bean scoped as
a <<core.adoc#beans-factory-scopes-prototype,prototype>>.

[source,xml,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
	<beans xmlns="http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
		xmlns:lang="http://www.springframework.org/schema/lang"
		xsi:schemaLocation="
			http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans/spring-beans.xsd
			http://www.springframework.org/schema/lang http://www.springframework.org/schema/lang/spring-lang.xsd">

		<lang:groovy id="messenger" script-source="classpath:Messenger.groovy" scope="prototype">
			<lang:property name="message" value="I Can Do The RoboCop" />
		</lang:groovy>

		<bean id="bookingService" class="x.y.DefaultBookingService">
			<property name="messenger" ref="messenger" />
		</bean>

	</beans>
----

See <<core.adoc#beans-factory-scopes,Bean scopes>> in <<core.adoc#beans,The IoC container>>
for a fuller discussion of the scoping support in the Spring Framework.




[[xsd-schemas-lang]]
=== The lang XML schema

The `lang` tags in Spring XML configuration deal with exposing objects that have been written
in a dynamic language such as JRuby or Groovy as beans in the Spring container.

These tags (and the dynamic language support) are comprehensively covered in the chapter
entitled <<integration.adoc#dynamic-language,Dynamic language support>>.
Please do consult that chapter for full details on this support and the `lang` tags themselves.

In the interest of completeness, to use the tags in the `lang` schema, you need to have
the following preamble at the top of your Spring XML configuration file; the text in the
following snippet references the correct schema so that the tags in the `lang` namespace
are available to you.

[source,xml,indent=0]
[subs="verbatim,quotes"]
----
	<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
	<beans xmlns="http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans"
		xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
		__xmlns:lang="http://www.springframework.org/schema/lang"__ xsi:schemaLocation="
			http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans/spring-beans.xsd
			__http://www.springframework.org/schema/lang http://www.springframework.org/schema/lang/spring-lang.xsd"__> <!-- bean definitions here -->

	</beans>
----




[[dynamic-language-resources]]
== Further Resources

Find below links to further resources about the various dynamic languages described in
this chapter.

* The http://jruby.org/[JRuby] homepage
* The http://www.groovy-lang.org/[Groovy] homepage
* The http://www.beanshell.org/[BeanShell] homepage
